(WIP) Update to Android cryptography (#1664)
OWASP/owasp-mstg: Document/0x05e-Testing-Cryptography.md

We can identify key components of cryptography system in Android:

- [Provider](0x05e-Testing-Cryptography.md#provider)
- KeyStore - see the section [KeyStore](0x05d-Testing-Data-Storage.md#keystore) in the chapter "Testing Data Storage"
- KeyChain - see the section [KeyChain](0x05d-Testing-Data-Storage.md#keychain) in the chapter "Testing Data Storage"

Android cryptography APIs are based on the Java Cryptography Architecture (JCA). JCA separates the interfaces and implementation, making it possible to include several [security providers](https://developer.android.com/reference/java/security/Provider.html "Android Security Providers") that can implement sets of cryptographic algorithms. Most of the JCA interfaces and classes are defined in the `java.security.*` and `javax.crypto.*` packages. In addition, there are Android specific packages `android.security.*` and `android.security.keystore.*`.

> KeyStore and KeyChain provides APIs for storing and using keys (behind the scene, KeyChain API uses KeyStore system). These systems allow to administer the full lifecycle of the cryptographic keys. Requirements and guidance for implementation of cryptographic key management can be found in [Key Management Cheat Sheet](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Key_Management_Cheat_Sheet.html "Key Management Cheat Sheet"). We can identify following phases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
KeyStore and KeyChain provide APIs for storing and using keys (behind the scene, KeyChain API uses KeyStore system). These systems allow to administer the full lifecycle of the cryptographic keys. Requirements and guidance for implementation of cryptographic key management can be found in [Key Management Cheat Sheet](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Key_Management_Cheat_Sheet.html "Key Management Cheat Sheet"). We can identify following phases:
```

> - generating of a key

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- generating a key
```

> - using of a key

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- using a key
```

> - storing of a key

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- storing a key
```

> - archiving of a key

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- archiving a key
```

> - deleting of a key

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- deleting a key
```

> Please note that storing of a key is analyzed in the chapter "[Testing Data Storage](0x05d-Testing-Data-Storage.md)".

> These phases are managed by Keystore/KeyChain system. However how the system works depends on how application developer used it. Then, you should focus on functions which are used by application developer. You should identify and verify following functions:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These phases are managed by the Keystore/KeyChain system. However how the system works depends on how the application developer implemented it. For the analysis process you should focus on functions which are used by the application developer. You should identify and verify the following functions:
```

  - It is recommended to stop specifying a security provider. Instead, always use a [patched security provider](0x05e-Testing-Cryptography.md#updating-provider).
  - The support for the `Crypto` provider has dropped and the provider is deprecated. The same applies to its `SHA1PRNG` for secure random.
- For Android 8.1 (API level 27) and above the [Developer Documentation](https://developer.android.com/about/versions/oreo/android-8.1 "Cryptography updates") shows that:
  - Conscrypt, known as `AndroidOpenSSL`, is preferred above using Bouncy Castle and it has new implementations: `AlgorithmParameters:GCM` , `KeyGenerator:AES`, `KeyGenerator:DESEDE`, `KeyGenerator:HMACMD5`, `KeyGenerator:HMACSHA1`, `KeyGenerator:HMACSHA224`, `KeyGenerator:HMACSHA256`, `KeyGenerator:HMACSHA384`, `KeyGenerator:HMACSHA512`, `SecretKeyFactory:DESEDE`, and `Signature:NONEWITHECDSA`.
  - You should not use the `IvParameterSpec.class` anymore for GCM, but use the `GCMParameterSpec.class` instead.
  - Sockets have changed from `OpenSSLSocketImpl` to `ConscryptFileDescriptorSocket`, and `ConscryptEngineSocket`.

>   - `SSLSession` with null parameters give an NullPointerException.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `SSLSession` with null parameters give a `NullPointerException`.
```

>   - You need to have large enough arrays as input bytes for generating a key otherwise, an InvalidKeySpecException is thrown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - You need to have large enough arrays as input bytes for generating a key otherwise, an `InvalidKeySpecException` is thrown.
```

>   - If a Socket read is interrupted, you get an `SocketException`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - If a Socket read is interrupted, you get a `SocketException`.
```

> - For Android 9 (API level 28) and above the [Android Developer Blog](https://android-developers.googleblog.com/2018/03/cryptography-changes-in-android-p.html "Cryptography Changes in Android P") shows even more aggressive changes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For Android 9 (API level 28) and above the [Android Developer Blog](https://android-developers.googleblog.com/2018/03/cryptography-changes-in-android-p.html "Cryptography Changes in Android P") shows even more changes:
```

  - You get a warning if you still specify a security provider using the `getInstance` method and you target any API below 28. If you target Android 9 (API level 28) or above, you get an error.
  - The `Crypto` security provider is now removed. Calling it will result in a `NoSuchProviderException`.

> - For Android 10 (API level 29) the [Developer Documentation](https://developer.android.com/about/versions/10/behavior-changes-all#security "Security Changes in Android 10") list all network security changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- For Android 10 (API level 29) the [Developer Documentation](https://developer.android.com/about/versions/10/behavior-changes-all#security "Security Changes in Android 10") lists all network security changes.
```

#### Recommendation

The following list of recommendations should be considered during app examination:

- You should ensure that the best practices outlined in the "[Cryptography for Mobile Apps](0x04g-Testing-Cryptography.md)" chapter are followed.

> - You should ensure that provider has the latest updates - [Updating security provider](https://developer.android.com/training/articles/security-gms-provider "Updating security provider").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You should ensure that the security provider has the latest updates - [Updating security provider](https://developer.android.com/training/articles/security-gms-provider "Updating security provider").
```

Reviewer: maybe call it security provider everywhere?

Author: Changed to security provider.

KeyStore and KeyChain provides APIs for storing and using keys (behind the scene, KeyChain API uses KeyStore system). These systems allow to administer the full lifecycle of the cryptographic keys. Requirements and guidance for implementation of cryptographic key management can be found in [Key Management Cheat Sheet](https://owasp.org/www-project-cheat-sheets/cheatsheets/Key_Management_Cheat_Sheet.html "Key Management Cheat Sheet"). We can identify following phases:

- generating of a key
- using of a key
- storing of a key
- archiving of a key
- deleting of a key

> Please note that storing of a key is analyzed in the chapter "[Testing Data Storage](0x05d-Testing-Data-Storage.md)".

> These phases are managed by Keystore/KeyChain system. However how the system works depends on how application developer used it. Then, you should focus on functions which are used by application developer. You should identify and verify following functions:

Reviewer: let's add Key-rotation here as well: after all every key has a given lifetime given the security put into securing it and the need for attackers to grab it I(e.g. risk of the data being leaked)
.

Author: Good point. That topic need `more love` also (at least one section level 4).

Author: Added to list of functionalities and added to #1689

- [Key generation](0x05e-Testing-Cryptography.md#key-generation)
- [Random number generation](0x05e-Testing-Cryptography.md#random-number-generation)

> You can go further and verify how good is a key by performing [key attestation](0x05e-Testing-Cryptography.md#key-attestation).

Reviewer: i thought key attestation was mostly about verifying the integrity of the Secure world in android. Not necessarily whether the key itself was ok? And is it already broadly available?

Author: My bad, I think about something else here (key lifecycle) and link it incorrectly.

Author: Additionally, I moved key attestation to Testing Data Storage as it is related closely to hardware-backed storage of keys.

Apps that target modern API levels, went through the following changes:

- For Android 7.0 (API level 24) and above [the Android Developer blog shows that](https://android-developers.googleblog.com/2016/06/security-crypto-provider-deprecated-in.html "Security provider Crypto deprecated in Andorid N"):
  - It is recommended to stop specifying a security provider. Instead, always use a patched security provider.
  - The support for the `Crypto` provider has dropped and the provider is deprecated. The same applies to its `SHA1PRNG` for secure random.
- For Android 8.1 (API level 27) and above the [Developer Documentation](https://developer.android.com/about/versions/oreo/android-8.1 "Cryptography updates") shows that:

>   - Conscrypt, known as `AndroidOpenSSL`, is preferred above using Bouncy Castle and it has new implementations: `AlgorithmParameters:GCM` , `KeyGenerator:AES`, `KeyGenerator:DESEDE`, `KeyGenerator:HMACMD5`, `KeyGenerator:HMACSHA1`, `KeyGenerator:HMACSHA224`, `KeyGenerator:HMACSHA256`, `KeyGenerator:HMACSHA384`, `KeyGenerator:HMACSHA512`, `SecretKeyFactory:DESEDE`, and `Signature:NONEWITHECDSA`.

Reviewer: please note that this works well/best, if you patch your security provider. I would recommend to link to that as well.

Author: In recommendation section (Document/0x05e-Testing-Cryptography.md#recommendation) I added that security provided should be updated (and provide a link to Android docs). Do you think to add it here also?

Reviewer: I guess so :), just a quick reference to the recommendation and the example there.

Author: Done.

>   - You should not use the `IvParameterSpec.class` anymore for GCM, but use the `GCMParameterSpec.class` instead.

Reviewer: IT would be good to detail that a bit, as there are a few problems with GCM (maybe we have it elsewhere with the guide):
the Nonce should NOT be repeated for the same key (as it is no IV), so there is a statemachine involved and/lor you need to change the key every time as well (e.g. use envelope-encryption). and there are limits to ohw many times you can use it.

Author: Added to #1689

provider: BC 1.57(BouncyCastle Security Provider v1.57)
provider: HarmonyJSSE 1.0(Harmony JSSE Provider)
provider: AndroidKeyStore 1.0(Android KeyStore security provider)
```

For some applications that support older versions of Android (e.g.: only used versions lower than Android 7.0 (API level 24)), bundling an up-to-date library may be the only option. Spongy Castle (a repackaged version of Bouncy Castle) is a common choice in these situations. Repackaging is necessary because Bouncy Castle is included in the Android SDK. The latest version of [Spongy Castle](https://rtyley.github.io/spongycastle/ "Spongy Castle") likely fixes issues encountered in the earlier versions of [Bouncy Castle](https://www.cvedetails.com/vulnerability-list/vendor_id-7637/Bouncycastle.html "CVE Details Bouncy Castle") that were included in Android. Note that the Bouncy Castle libraries packed with Android are often not as complete as their counterparts from the [legion of the Bouncy Castle](https://www.bouncycastle.org/java.html "Bouncy Castle in Java"). Lastly: bear in mind that packing large libraries such as Spongy Castle will often lead to a multidexed Android application.

> 

Reviewer: is Libsodium a valid alternative here to get less size in the app?

Author: Can be, but I need to check that first.

Reviewer: I guess we mostly need to check for an alternative when the NDK is used instead of the SDK. Not sure what fits there currently as I haven't visited the NDK for a long time.

Author: Added to #1689 - as it requires further investigation.

However, be aware that the `AndroidKeyStore` API has been changed significantly throughout various versions of Android. In earlier versions, the `AndroidKeyStore` API only supported storing public/private key pairs (e.g., RSA). Symmetric key support has only been added since Android 6.0 (API level 23). As a result, a developer needs to handle the different Android API levels to securely store symmetric keys.

In order to securely store symmetric keys on devices running on Android 5.1 (API level 22) or lower, we need to generate a public/private key pair. We encrypt the symmetric key using the public key and store the private key in the `AndroidKeyStore`. The encrypted symmetric key can now be safely stored in the `SharedPreferences`. Whenever we need the symmetric key, the application retrieves the private key from the `AndroidKeyStore` and decrypts the symmetric key.

> When keys are generated and used within the `AndroidKeyStore` and the `KeyInfo.isinsideSecureHardware` returns `true`, then we know that we cannot just dump the keys nor monitor its cryptographic operations. It becomes debatable what will be eventually more safe: using `PBKDF2withHmacSHA256` to generate a key that is still in reachable dumpable memory, or using the `AndroidKeyStore` for which the keys might never get into memory. With Android 9 (API level 28) we see that additional security enhancements have been implemented in order to separate the TEE from the `AndroidKeyStore` which make it favorable over using `PBKDF2withHmacSHA256`. However, more testing and investigating will take place on that subject in the near future.

Reviewer: the above paragraph still is pretty strong to me, why would we remove it?

Author: I devided it. I used the part regarding AndroidKeyStore and SharedPreferences. But need to put back part about `PBKDF2withHmacSHA256`. Currently it should be in 0x05d-Testing-Data-Storage.md#Storing-a-Key-example.

This sample creates the RSA key pair with a key size of 4096-bit (i.e. modulus size).

A symmetric encryption key can be generated from the passphrase by using the Password Based Key Derivation Function version 2 (PBKDF2). This cryptographic protocol is designed to generate secure and non brute-forceable keys. The code listing below illustrates how to generate a strong encryption key based on a password.

```java
public static SecretKey generateStrongAESKey(char[] password, int keyLength)
{
    //Initiliaze objects and variables for later use

>     int iterationCount = 10000;

Reviewer: maybe make this larger and explain what to do depending on the device profile?

Author: Added references to NIST SP (mainly in 0x04g) and some minor fixes.

    int saltLength     = keyLength / 8;
    SecureRandom random = new SecureRandom();
    //Generate the salt
    byte[] salt = new byte[saltLength];
    random.nextBytes(salt);
    KeySpec keySpec = new PBEKeySpec(password.toCharArray(), salt, iterationCount, keyLength);
    SecretKeyFactory keyFactory = SecretKeyFactory.getInstance("PBKDF2WithHmacSHA1");
    byte[] keyBytes = keyFactory.generateSecret(keySpec).getEncoded();
    return new SecretKeySpec(keyBytes, "AES");
}
```

> The above method requires a character array containing the password and the needed key length in bits, for instance a 128 or 256-bit AES key. We define an iteration count of 10000 rounds which will be used by the PBKDF2 algorithm. Increasing number of iteration significantly increases the workload for a brute-force attack on password, however it can affect performance as more computational power is required for key derivation. We define the salt size equal to the key length, we divide by 8 to take care of the bit to byte conversion. We use the `SecureRandom` class to randomly generate a salt. Obviously, the salt is something you want to keep constant to ensure the same encryption key is generated time after time for the same supplied password. Note that you can store the salt privately in `SharedPreferences`. It is recommended to exclude the salt from the Android backup mechanism to prevent synchronization in case of higher risk data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above method requires a character array containing the password and the needed key length in bits, for instance a 128 or 256-bit AES key. We define an iteration count of 10,000 rounds which will be used by the PBKDF2 algorithm. Increasing number of iteration significantly increases the workload for a brute-force attack on password, however it can affect performance as more computational power is required for key derivation. We define the salt size equal to the key length, we divide by 8 to take care of the bit to byte conversion. We use the `SecureRandom` class to randomly generate a salt. Obviously, the salt is something you want to keep constant to ensure the same encryption key is generated time after time for the same supplied password. Note that you can store the salt privately in `SharedPreferences`. It is recommended to exclude the salt from the Android backup mechanism to prevent synchronization in case of higher risk data.
```

#### Random number generation

> Cryptography requires secure pseudo random number generation (PRNG). Standard Java class (means java.util.Random) does not provide sufficient randomness and in fact may make it possible for an attacker to guess the next value that will be generated, and use this guess to impersonate another user or access sensitive information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cryptography requires secure pseudo random number generation (PRNG). Standard Java classes as `java.util.Random` do not provide sufficient randomness and in fact may make it possible for an attacker to guess the next value that will be generated, and use this guess to impersonate another user or access sensitive information.
```

During verification take the following checks should be performed:

- make sure that key is used according to purpose defined during its creation (it is relevant to KeyStore keys, which can have KeyProperties defined)
- make sure that for asymmetric keys, the private key is exclusively used for signing and the public key is only used for encryption.
- make sure that symmetric keys are not reused for multiple purposes. A new symmetric key should be generated if it's used in a different context.
- make sure that cryptography is used according to business purpose.

#### Dynamic Analysis

Hook cryptographic methods and analyze the keys that are being used. Monitor file system access while cryptographic operations are being performed to assess where key material is written to or read from.

### Testing Random Number Generation (MSTG-CRYPTO-6)

#### Overview

This test case focuses on random values used by application. Following checks should be performed:

> - identify all instances where random values are used and all instances of random number generators

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- identify all instances where random values are used and all instances of random number generators are of `Securerandom`
```

### Testing Symmetric Cryptography (MSTG-CRYPTO-1)

#### Overview

This test case focuses on hardcoded symmetric cryptography as the only method of encryption. Following checks should be performed:

- identify all instance of symmectric cryptography
- verify if symmetric keys in all identified instances are not hardcoded
- verify if hardcoded symmetric cryptography is not used as the only method of encryption

#### Static Analysis

Identify all the instances of symmetric key encryption in code and look for mechanism which loads or provides a symmetric key. You can look for:

- symmetric algorithms (like `DES`, `AES`, etc.)
- specifications for a key generator (like `KeyGenParameterSpec`, `KeyPairGeneratorSpec`, `KeyPairGenerator`, `KeyGenerator`, `KeyProperties`, etc.)
- classes which uses `java.security.*`, `javax.crypto.*`, `android.security.*` and `android.security.keystore.*` packages.

Verify that symmetric keys in all identified instances are not hardcoded. Check if symmetric keys are not:

- part of application resources
- part of a static identifier (which might not be clearly within the definition)
- hardcoded in code

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add something like "part of a derivation function that always ends up with the same result"?

Author: I started to consider different angles here. Maybe, I overthink this, but would be better to say that 'value which can be derived from known values' This should cover "part of a derivation function that always ends up with the same result" (which can be a narrow case). 
Example:
* function(application_name)
* function(system_variable)
* function which multiply by 0

What do you think?

Reviewer: yes, sounds legit.

Author: Corrected.
